Automatic Zoom
TaskHub Interview Guide • Page 1

TaskHub — Milestones 1, 2 & 3

Interview Questions & Answers

Stack: React.js • React Native • Next.js • TypeScript • Node.js • Express • PostgreSQL • Prisma • Tailwind CSS • Material UI •
Redux Toolkit • REST • JWT • OAuth • Jest • GitHub Actions • Sentry • Swagger/OpenAPI • ESLint • AWS • Firebase

Interview method: Answer in this order: Definition → Why we use it → TaskHub example → trade-off/alternative if relevant.
TaskHub Interview Guide • Page 2

Milestone 1 — Project & Backend Foundation

1. What is TaskHub's overall architecture?

Answer: React web and React Native mobile clients communicate with a Node.js/Express REST API. The backend uses
Prisma to access PostgreSQL, with AWS/Firebase and monitoring/testing/CI tools added around the core system.

2. What is Node.js?

Answer: Node.js is a JavaScript runtime based on Chrome's V8 engine that lets us execute JavaScript or TypeScript on
the server.

3. Why use Express.js?

Answer: Express is a lightweight Node.js framework for HTTP servers and REST APIs. It provides routing, middleware,
request/response handling, and error handling.

4. What is middleware?

Answer: Middleware is a function that runs during the Express request-response lifecycle. It can authenticate, validate, log,
parse data, or handle errors.

5. What is CORS?

Answer: CORS controls which browser origins can access an API. It matters when the frontend and backend run on
different origins.

6. Why use Helmet?

Answer: Helmet adds security-related HTTP headers to Express responses and helps establish safer browser defaults.

7. Why use dotenv?

Answer: dotenv loads configuration from environment variables, keeping values such as database URLs and secrets out of
application source code.

8. Why use Zod?

Answer: Zod validates incoming data at runtime and works well with TypeScript. We can validate request bodies,
parameters, queries, and configuration.

9. Why TypeScript?

Answer: TypeScript provides static typing, better IDE support, safer refactoring, and clearer contracts across the full-stack
codebase.

10. What is REST?

Answer: REST is an architectural style for resource-oriented HTTP APIs. GET reads, POST creates, PATCH updates
partially, and DELETE removes resources.

11. 401 vs 403?

Answer: 401 means authentication is missing or invalid. 403 means the request is understood but the authenticated user is
not allowed to perform the operation.

12. What is ESLint?

Answer: ESLint statically analyzes JavaScript or TypeScript and flags problematic patterns and consistency issues before
runtime.

13. Why GitHub Actions?

Answer: GitHub Actions automates CI/CD. TaskHub can run lint, tests, type checks, builds, and later deployment
workflows on pushes or pull requests.

14. Why a monorepo?
TaskHub Interview Guide • Page 3

Answer: A monorepo keeps web, mobile, backend, and shared packages in one repository, making shared types and
coordinated changes easier to manage.

15. What is an HTTP status code 201?

Answer: 201 Created indicates that a request successfully created a new resource, commonly returned by a successful
POST create operation.
TaskHub Interview Guide • Page 4

Milestone 2 — PostgreSQL + Prisma

1. What is PostgreSQL?

Answer: PostgreSQL is an open-source relational database. It stores structured data in tables and supports relationships,
constraints, indexes, and transactions.

2. Why PostgreSQL for TaskHub?

Answer: TaskHub has strongly related data such as users, projects, memberships, and tasks. A relational database
provides strong integrity and transaction support.

3. What is Prisma?

Answer: Prisma is a TypeScript-friendly ORM/database toolkit that provides a schema, migrations, generated client, and
type-safe queries.

4. What is an ORM?

Answer: Object-Relational Mapping lets application code work with database records through programming-language
objects and methods rather than writing SQL for every operation.

5. PostgreSQL vs Prisma?

Answer: PostgreSQL is the database that stores the data. Prisma is the application-side data-access layer used by our
TypeScript backend to communicate with it.

6. What is a primary key?

Answer: A primary key uniquely identifies a row. In TaskHub, entities use UUID string IDs.

7. What is a foreign key?

Answer: A foreign key references a key in another table and maintains a relationship, such as Project.ownerId referencing
User.id.

8. What is one-to-many?

Answer: One record can relate to many records. For example, one user can own multiple projects.

9. What is many-to-many?

Answer: Many users can belong to many projects. TaskHub represents this with the ProjectMember junction table.

10. Why ProjectMember?

Answer: It implements the many-to-many relationship and also stores membership-specific information such as OWNER,
MANAGER, or MEMBER.

11. What is a unique constraint?

Answer: A unique constraint prevents duplicate values. TaskHub makes user email unique to prevent duplicate
registrations.

12. What is an index?

Answer: An index speeds up searches and filtering on selected columns. It improves reads but uses storage and adds
some write overhead.

13. What is a migration?

Answer: A migration is a version-controlled database schema change that can be applied consistently across
development, staging, and production.

14. prisma migrate vs prisma generate?

Answer: migrate creates/applies schema migrations; generate creates the Prisma Client code used by the application.
TaskHub Interview Guide • Page 5

15. When use raw SQL?

Answer: Prisma is preferred for normal application queries, but raw SQL can be justified for complex queries,
database-specific features, or cases requiring precise SQL control.
TaskHub Interview Guide • Page 6

Milestone 3 — REST API + Backend Architecture

1. Why layered architecture?

Answer: Separating controllers, services, and repositories keeps responsibilities clear, improves testing, and makes the
backend easier to maintain.

2. What does a Controller do?

Answer: It handles HTTP concerns: reads validated input, calls the appropriate service, and builds the HTTP response.
Complex business logic should not live there.

3. What does a Service do?

Answer: A service contains business/application logic and coordinates repositories or other services without depending
heavily on Express request/response objects.

4. What does a Repository do?

Answer: A repository abstracts database access, keeping Prisma queries and persistence details separate from business
logic.

5. Why not put Prisma queries in controllers?

Answer: That makes controllers large and tightly coupled to the database. Repositories centralize data access and make
services easier to test.

6. Explain the request flow.

Answer: Client → Express route → middleware → controller → service → repository → Prisma → PostgreSQL, then the
result travels back to the client.

7. What is validation?

Answer: Validation verifies that incoming data follows the API contract before business logic executes. Zod is used for
runtime schema validation.

8. Authentication vs authorization?

Answer: Authentication answers who the user is. Authorization answers what that user is allowed to do.

9. What is JWT?

Answer: JSON Web Token is a signed token containing claims that a server can verify. TaskHub will use JWTs for API
authentication.

10. Why access and refresh tokens?

Answer: A short-lived access token limits exposure if stolen. A refresh token allows a client to obtain a new access token
without frequent login.

11. What is centralized error handling?

Answer: A common Express error middleware converts known application errors into consistent responses and logs
unexpected errors.

12. Why version APIs?

Answer: Versioning such as /api/v1 lets the backend evolve without immediately breaking existing web and mobile clients.

13. What is Swagger/OpenAPI?

Answer: OpenAPI is a standard API description format. Swagger tooling can render interactive documentation for
developers and testers.

14. What is Jest?
TaskHub Interview Guide • Page 7

Answer: Jest is a JavaScript/TypeScript testing framework used for unit tests and, with appropriate setup, integration tests.

15. What is Sentry?

Answer: Sentry monitors runtime errors and performance, providing stack traces and context that help diagnose
production problems.
TaskHub Interview Guide • Page 8

Rapid Revision

Term
 Short interview answer

Express
 Node.js framework for HTTP APIs, routing, and middleware.
Middleware
 Function executed during the Express request-response lifecycle.
REST
 Resource-oriented HTTP API style.
PostgreSQL
 Relational database storing TaskHub data.
Prisma
 Type-safe ORM/database toolkit.
Migration
 Version-controlled database schema change.
JWT
 Signed token used for verifiable authentication claims.
OAuth
 Delegated authorization protocol used by external identity providers.
Zod
 Runtime schema validation library for TypeScript.
Swagger/OpenAPI
 Standard way to describe and document APIs.
Jest
 Testing framework for JavaScript/TypeScript.
Sentry
 Production error and performance monitoring.
Repository
 Data-access layer.
Service
 Business/application logic layer.
Controller
 HTTP request/response layer.

Note: Milestone 3 is focused on the REST API and Controller → Service → Repository architecture that we build after the
database foundation.

Milestone 4  JWT and password hashing foundation

Q1. What is authentication?
A. Authentication is the process of verifying the identity of a user or system.

Q2. What is the difference between authentication and authorization?
A. Authentication answers "Who are you?", while authorization answers "What are you allowed to do?"

Q3. Why should passwords be hashed?
A. Passwords should be hashed instead of stored as plain text so the original password cannot simply be recovered if the database is compromised.

Q4. Why do we use bcrypt?
A. bcrypt is a password hashing algorithm designed to be computationally expensive, making brute-force password attacks more difficult.

Q5. What is JWT?
A. JWT stands for JSON Web Token. It is a signed token containing claims that the server can verify and use for authentication.

Q6. What are the three parts of a JWT?
A. A JWT contains a header, payload, and signature.

Q7. Is JWT encrypted?
A. No. A normal JWT is encoded and signed, not encrypted. Sensitive information should not be stored in the payload.

Q8. What is an access token?
A. An access token is a short-lived token used by the client to authenticate API requests.

Q9. What is a refresh token?
A. A refresh token is a longer-lived credential used to obtain a new access token without requiring the user to log in again.

Q10. Why should access tokens be short-lived?
A. Short-lived access tokens reduce the security impact if a token is stolen.

Q11. What is OAuth?
A. OAuth is a delegated authorization framework that allows an application to use an external provider such as Google for authentication or authorization without handling the provider's password.

Q12. Is OAuth the same as JWT?
A. No. OAuth is an authorization/authentication flow or framework, while JWT is a token format. OAuth can be used to authenticate a user and our application can then issue its own JWT.

Q13. Why do we use Zod in authentication?
A. Zod validates incoming request data at runtime and ensures that values such as email and password follow the expected API contract.

Q14. Why should validation happen on the backend?
A. Client-side validation improves user experience, but the backend must validate independently because clients cannot be trusted.

Q15. Why separate Controller, Service, and Repository?
A. The Controller handles HTTP requests, the Service contains business logic, and the Repository handles database access. This separation improves maintainability, testing, and scalability.

Q16. Why shouldn't database queries be directly inside controllers?
A. Direct database queries make controllers tightly coupled to the database and difficult to test. A repository keeps data-access logic separate.

Q17. What happens when a user logs in?
A. The backend finds the user, compares the submitted password with the stored bcrypt hash, generates authentication tokens, and returns the authenticated user information and tokens.

Q18. What happens when accessing a protected API?
A. The client sends the access token, authentication middleware verifies the JWT, extracts the user ID, and allows the request to continue if the token is valid.

Q19. What is authentication middleware?
A. Authentication middleware verifies the user's credentials or JWT before allowing access to protected routes.

Q20. Why should JWT secrets not be hardcoded?
A. JWT secrets are sensitive credentials. They should be stored in environment variables or a secure secrets manager so they are not exposed in source control and can be rotated safely.

Q1. How do you know Google OAuth succeeded?
A. Google redirected the user to our registered callback endpoint, Passport successfully verified the Google profile, and our backend found or created the corresponding TaskHub user.

Q2. What information did Google provide to TaskHub?
A. We received the Google profile ID, display name, and email address. We store the Google profile ID as googleId so the same Google account can be recognized in future logins.

Q3. Why is password null for a Google user?
A. The user's identity was verified by Google, so the user does not need a local TaskHub password for Google authentication.

Q4. What is googleId used for?
A. googleId uniquely identifies the user's Google identity and allows TaskHub to find the same user during subsequent Google logins.

Q5. Does successful Google OAuth mean the user is authenticated to all TaskHub APIs?
A. Not by itself. After Google verifies the identity, TaskHub must issue its own access token, such as a JWT, which is then used to authenticate requests to protected TaskHub APIs.

Q6. Why does TaskHub generate its own JWT after Google authentication?
A. Google authenticates the external identity, while TaskHub needs its own authentication mechanism for its APIs. Issuing a TaskHub JWT gives the backend a consistent authentication mechanism for both Google users and normal email/password users.

Q7. What should the API response contain after successful Google authentication?
A. It should contain safe user information and TaskHub authentication credentials such as an access token and refresh token. Sensitive database fields such as password hashes and internal OAuth identifiers should not be unnecessarily returned.

Q1. Explain the Google OAuth flow in TaskHub.
A. The user starts Google login from TaskHub. The backend redirects the user to Google. Google authenticates the user and redirects back to our registered callback URL. Passport's Google strategy processes the profile, TaskHub finds or creates the user, and then TaskHub generates its own JWT access and refresh tokens.

Q2. Why do we use Passport?
A. Passport is authentication middleware for Node.js. It provides reusable authentication strategies, including Google OAuth 2.0, which simplifies integrating external authentication providers.

Q3. What is OAuth 2.0?
A. OAuth 2.0 is an authorization framework that allows an application to obtain authorized access through an external provider without handling the user's provider password directly.

Q4. What is the OAuth callback?
A. The callback is the backend endpoint to which Google redirects the user after successful authentication. TaskHub processes the authorization response there.

Q5. Why do we store googleId?
A. googleId uniquely identifies the user's Google account. It allows TaskHub to recognize the same Google account during future logins.

Q6. How does account linking work?
A. TaskHub first searches for a user using googleId. If no user exists, it can search by email. If an existing TaskHub account has the same email, we link the Google account by saving googleId rather than creating a duplicate user.

Q7. What happens when a completely new Google user logs in?
A. TaskHub creates a new user with the Google profile information and stores the Google ID. The user can then receive TaskHub authentication credentials.

Q8. Why can password be null for a Google user?
A. Because Google is responsible for authenticating the user's identity. The user does not need a local TaskHub password when using Google authentication.

Q9. Why does TaskHub generate its own JWT after Google login?
A. Google authenticates the external identity, but TaskHub needs to authenticate requests to its own APIs. Therefore, after successful Google authentication, TaskHub generates its own access and refresh tokens.

Q10. What is the difference between Google authentication and TaskHub authentication?
A. Google verifies the user's Google identity. TaskHub then creates its own authenticated session/token context so the user can access TaskHub's protected APIs.

Q11. What is redirect_uri_mismatch?
A. It occurs when the redirect URI sent by the application does not exactly match the authorized redirect URI configured in Google Cloud.

Q12. Why was redirect_uri_mismatch happening in our project?
A. Our backend was sending a localhost callback URL on port 5050, but the Google OAuth client configuration did not exactly match that URL. Once the exact callback URL was configured, Google accepted the request.

Q13. What OAuth scopes did we use?
A. We used openid, profile, and email because TaskHub only needs basic identity information for Google login.

Q14. Why should we request minimum OAuth scopes?
A. Minimum scopes reduce security risk and avoid requesting unnecessary access to the user's Google data.

Q15. Where should GOOGLE_CLIENT_SECRET be stored?
A. It should be stored securely on the backend using environment variables or a secret manager. It must never be committed to GitHub or exposed to frontend or mobile applications.

Q16. What happens if the user cancels Google authentication?
A. The OAuth provider returns an authentication error or denial. Our backend should handle it and return a safe error response instead of issuing authentication credentials.

Q17. How do we protect APIs after Google login?
A. The backend issues a TaskHub JWT access token. The client sends it using the Authorization Bearer header, and authMiddleware validates the token before allowing access to protected endpoints.

Q18. Can a Google user also have a password?
A. Yes, depending on the application's account-linking policy. A user can potentially have both a local password and a linked Google identity.

Q19. What is the purpose of the refresh token?
A. A refresh token allows the application to obtain a new access token after the short-lived access token expires without requiring the user to authenticate again.

Q20. Explain our complete authentication architecture.
A. TaskHub supports local authentication and Google OAuth. Local authentication verifies a password, while Google OAuth delegates identity verification to Google. Both flows eventually produce TaskHub access and refresh tokens. Protected APIs use authentication middleware to validate the TaskHub access token.


Milestone 6 — Interview Q&A Copy/Paste
Q1. What is the User Module responsible for in TaskHub?
A. The User Module handles authenticated user profile management, including viewing the current profile, updating profile information, avatar upload preparation, and role-based authorization.

Q2. Why do we separate Controller, Service and Repository?
A. The Controller handles HTTP requests and responses, the Service contains business logic, and the Repository handles database operations. This separation makes the application easier to maintain, test and scale.

Q3. How does GET /users/me know which user is logged in?
A. The client sends a JWT access token in the Authorization Bearer header. The authentication middleware verifies the token and extracts the user ID. The controller then uses that ID to fetch the user's profile.

Q4. Why should users not send their user ID to GET /users/me?
A. The user ID should come from the verified JWT rather than the request body or URL. This prevents users from attempting to access another user's profile by changing an ID.

Q5. Why do we use PATCH for profile updates?
A. PATCH is appropriate because profile updates are usually partial. The user may update only their name or email without sending the complete user object.

Q6. Why do we validate profile data with Zod?
A. Zod validates and parses incoming data at the application boundary. It prevents invalid data from reaching the business and database layers.

Q7. Why don't we allow role in the profile update request?
A. Allowing users to update their own role could cause privilege escalation. A normal USER could potentially change their role to ADMIN. Role changes should be controlled by an authorized administrative process.

Q8. What is authorization?
A. Authentication answers who the user is, while authorization determines what the authenticated user is allowed to do.

Q9. What is the difference between authentication and authorization?
A. Authentication verifies identity, such as validating a JWT. Authorization checks permissions, such as determining whether the authenticated user has an ADMIN role.

Q10. Why did we add UserRole to Prisma?
A. UserRole provides a controlled set of permissions-related identities such as USER and ADMIN. It allows the backend to implement role-based authorization.

Q11. Why should the default role be USER?
A. New accounts should have the minimum required privileges by default. This follows the principle of least privilege.

Q12. What is Multer?
A. Multer is Express middleware used to process multipart/form-data, especially file uploads.

Q13. Why do we use multipart/form-data for avatar uploads?
A. Files cannot be sent as normal JSON. multipart/form-data allows text fields and binary files to be sent in the same HTTP request.

Q14. Why did we use memoryStorage for Multer?
A. Memory storage keeps the uploaded file in memory temporarily so it can later be transferred directly to cloud storage such as AWS S3 or Firebase Storage without permanently storing files on the application server.

Q15. Why shouldn't we permanently store uploaded files on the backend server?
A. Application servers can be replaced or scaled horizontally. Cloud object storage provides durable, scalable storage and allows multiple backend instances to access the same files.

Q16. What file validation do we perform for avatars?
A. We validate the MIME type and restrict the upload to JPEG, PNG and WEBP images. We also limit the file size to 5 MB.

Q17. Why should we generate our own file name?
A. Original file names can collide and may contain unsafe or unexpected characters. Generating unique file names makes cloud storage safer and prevents collisions.

Q18. Where will avatar files eventually be stored?
A. TaskHub can use AWS S3 or Firebase Storage. The database should store the resulting file URL or object key rather than the binary file itself.

Q19. Should the database store the image itself?
A. Generally no. The database should store metadata such as the avatar URL or storage key, while the actual binary file is stored in object storage.

Q20. What happens when a request doesn't contain a JWT?
A. The authentication middleware rejects the request with HTTP 401 Unauthorized.

Q21. What happens when an authenticated USER tries to access an ADMIN endpoint?
A. Authentication succeeds, but authorization fails. The authorization middleware returns HTTP 403 Forbidden.

Q22. What is the difference between 401 and 403?
A. 401 means the request is not properly authenticated. 403 means the user is authenticated but does not have permission to perform the requested action.

Q23. Why should password and googleId not be returned in a normal profile response?
A. Sensitive authentication-related fields should not be exposed unnecessarily. The API should return only the information required by the client.

Q24. How does the User Module work with Google OAuth?
A. Google OAuth creates or finds the TaskHub user and stores the Google ID. Once authenticated, the same user can use the User Module through the TaskHub JWT.

Q25. How would you test the User Module?
A. I would test authenticated profile retrieval, profile updates, validation errors, unauthorized requests, role authorization, avatar uploads, file type restrictions, file size restrictions, and database persistence.

Milestone 7 — Interview Q&A Copy/Paste
Q1. How did you implement CRUD for projects?
A. I created REST endpoints for creating, listing, retrieving, updating and deleting projects. The routes use authentication middleware, the controller handles HTTP requests, the service contains business logic, and the repository handles Prisma database operations.

Q2. What is CRUD?
A. CRUD stands for Create, Read, Update and Delete. In TaskHub these operations are represented by POST, GET, PATCH and DELETE endpoints.

Q3. How do you determine the project owner?
A. The owner ID is taken from the authenticated user's JWT rather than from the request body. This prevents a client from creating a project on behalf of another user.

Q4. Why shouldn't ownerId be accepted from the frontend?
A. Because the frontend cannot be trusted. A malicious user could submit another user's ID. The backend should derive ownership from the verified authentication context.

Q5. How does project authorization work?
A. When retrieving, updating or deleting a project, the service retrieves the project and compares its ownerId with the authenticated user's ID. If they don't match, the API returns 403 Forbidden.

Q6. What is the difference between authentication and project authorization?
A. Authentication verifies the user's identity using the JWT. Project authorization determines whether that authenticated user is allowed to access or modify a particular project.

Q7. How did you implement pagination?
A. I accept page and limit query parameters and calculate skip using (page - 1) * limit. Prisma uses skip and take to retrieve the appropriate records.

Q8. Why do we need total and totalPages?
A. The frontend needs this information to build pagination controls and know how many pages of data are available.

Q9. What is the formula for pagination?
A. skip = (page - 1) * limit, and totalPages = Math.ceil(total / limit).

Q10. How did you implement search?
A. I use Prisma filtering with case-insensitive contains conditions on the project name and description.

Q11. How did you implement sorting?
A. I allow a controlled list of sortable fields such as name, createdAt and updatedAt, along with ascending or descending order.

Q12. Why do we restrict the sortBy values?
A. Allowing arbitrary database field names is unnecessary and unsafe. A whitelist ensures the client can only sort by supported fields.

Q13. How does filtering work?
A. The API accepts optional filters such as project status. The repository dynamically builds the Prisma where condition based on the validated query parameters.

Q14. Why does GET /projects only return the current user's projects?
A. The repository includes ownerId in the database query. Therefore PostgreSQL only returns projects belonging to the authenticated user.

Q15. Why is filtering by ownerId in the database better than filtering after retrieving all projects?
A. Database-level filtering is more efficient because only authorized records are retrieved from the database. It also reduces the risk of accidentally exposing another user's records.

Q16. What HTTP status code should project creation return?
A. 201 Created because a new project resource has been successfully created.

Q17. What status should be returned when a project doesn't exist?
A. 404 Not Found.

Q18. What status should be returned when a user tries to access another user's project?
A. 403 Forbidden because the user is authenticated but doesn't have permission to access that project.

Q19. What status should be returned when the JWT is missing?
A. 401 Unauthorized because the request has not been authenticated.

Q20. Why use PATCH for updating projects?
A. PATCH is appropriate for partial updates because the client can send only the fields that need to change.

Q21. Why is Zod used for project validation?
A. Zod validates request body and query parameters before they reach the service and database layers. It also provides TypeScript types from the validation schemas.

Q22. Why use a repository layer?
A. The repository isolates database-specific operations from business logic. This makes the service easier to test and allows the persistence implementation to change without rewriting controllers.

Q23. Why use a service layer?
A. The service contains business rules such as ownership checks, validation-related decisions and project management logic. Controllers remain focused on HTTP concerns.

Q24. What is the N+1 problem?
A. The N+1 problem occurs when an application performs one query to retrieve a list and then performs another query for each individual item. ORMs can accidentally cause this. Using Prisma include or appropriate joins/queries can reduce unnecessary database calls.

Q25. How would you improve project listing for a large production database?
A. I would add proper database indexes, optimize search, consider cursor-based pagination for very large datasets, select only required fields, monitor slow queries and potentially introduce caching where appropriate.

Milestone 8 — Interview Q&A
Q1. What is RBAC?
A. RBAC stands for Role-Based Access Control. Instead of assigning permissions directly to users, permissions are assigned to roles such as OWNER, MANAGER and MEMBER, and users receive permissions through their role.

Q2. Why did you introduce ProjectMember?
A. ProjectMember represents the many-to-many relationship between users and projects. A user can belong to multiple projects, and a project can have multiple users. The membership also stores the user's role within that project.

Q3. What roles did you implement?
A. I implemented OWNER, MANAGER and MEMBER roles.

Q4. What is the difference between authentication and authorization?
A. Authentication verifies who the user is, usually using a JWT. Authorization determines what that authenticated user is allowed to do.

Q5. How does TaskHub determine a user's project role?
A. The backend queries the ProjectMember table using the authenticated user's ID and the project ID. The returned membership contains the user's role.

Q6. Why should the frontend not decide whether a user is an OWNER or MANAGER?
A. The frontend cannot be trusted because users can modify requests. Authorization must always be enforced on the backend.

Q7. How does your permission middleware work?
A. The middleware receives allowed roles, retrieves the user's ProjectMember record, checks whether the user belongs to the project, and then checks whether their role is included in the allowed roles. If not, it returns 403 Forbidden.

Q8. Why return 403 for a member who cannot add another member?
A. The user is authenticated, but they don't have sufficient permission for the operation, so 403 Forbidden is appropriate.

Q9. Why return 401 instead?
A. 401 is used when authentication is missing or invalid. 403 is used when authentication succeeded but authorization failed.

Q10. Why is ProjectMember a separate table?
A. Because the relationship between users and projects is many-to-many and the relationship itself contains additional information such as the user's role.

Q11. What is a many-to-many relationship?
A. It means one user can belong to many projects and one project can contain many users. A join table such as ProjectMember is used to represent this relationship.

Q12. Why use @@unique([projectId, userId])?
A. It prevents the same user from being added to the same project multiple times.

Q13. Can the same user belong to multiple projects?
A. Yes. The unique constraint applies to the combination of projectId and userId, not to userId alone.

Q14. Why don't you allow the API client to create an OWNER membership?
A. Ownership is controlled by the backend. Allowing clients to assign themselves or another user as OWNER could create a privilege escalation vulnerability.

Q15. How does a project owner become a member?
A. When the project is created, the backend creates a corresponding ProjectMember record with the OWNER role.

Q16. Why use a database transaction when creating the project and owner membership?
A. Both operations should succeed or fail together. A transaction prevents a project from being created without its required owner membership.

Q17. Can a project have multiple owners in your implementation?
A. No. The project's owner is controlled by the ownerId field and the ProjectMember OWNER role is reserved for the project owner.

Q18. Can a MEMBER add another member?
A. No. The member management endpoints require OWNER or MANAGER permissions.

Q19. Can a MEMBER view project members?
A. Yes. In our current permission matrix, OWNER, MANAGER and MEMBER can list members.

Q20. Can a MANAGER change the OWNER's role?
A. No. The service explicitly prevents changing the OWNER role.

Q21. Can a MANAGER remove the OWNER?
A. No. The service prevents removing the OWNER.

Q22. What happens when a user is not a project member?
A. The permission middleware cannot find a ProjectMember record and returns 403 Forbidden.

Q23. Where should authorization logic live?
A. Reusable permission checks can live in middleware, while resource-specific business rules should remain in the service layer. This keeps authorization reusable without moving all business logic into middleware.

Q24. Why use middleware for RBAC?
A. Middleware allows permission checks to be applied consistently to multiple routes without duplicating authorization code in every controller.

Q25. How would you extend RBAC in the future?
A. I would define explicit permissions such as PROJECT_UPDATE, MEMBER_ADD, MEMBER_REMOVE and TASK_UPDATE, then map roles to permissions. This would make the authorization system more flexible as the application grows.

Q26. What is privilege escalation?
A. Privilege escalation occurs when a user gains permissions they should not have, such as a MEMBER assigning themselves the OWNER role. Backend authorization prevents this.

Q27. Why should authorization be checked on every protected operation?
A. A user may be authenticated but their permission depends on the specific project and role. Therefore authentication alone is not sufficient.

Q28. How would you test RBAC?
A. I would create users with OWNER, MANAGER and MEMBER roles and verify each operation against the expected permission matrix. I would also test non-members, invalid tokens and attempts to modify the owner.

Q29. What is the principle of least privilege?
A. Users should receive only the permissions required to perform their responsibilities. For example, a MEMBER should not receive member-management or project-deletion permissions.

Q30. How would you improve the current RBAC implementation for a large application?
A. I would introduce centralized permission definitions, avoid hard-coded role checks across the codebase, add authorization unit tests, add audit logs for sensitive operations, and potentially cache frequently accessed membership permissions.

Milestone 9 — Interview Q&A

Q1. How did you design the Task model?
A. A Task belongs to a Project and has relationships with two users: createdBy and assignedTo. It also contains status, priority, dueDate, timestamps and projectId.

Q2. Why do you need both createdById and assignedToId?
A. The user who creates a task and the user responsible for completing it can be different. createdById represents the creator while assignedToId represents the assignee.

Q3. What task statuses did you implement?
A. TODO, IN_PROGRESS and COMPLETED.

Q4. What priorities did you implement?
A. LOW, MEDIUM, HIGH and URGENT.

Q5. How does task assignment work?
A. The API receives an assignedToId. Before assigning the task, the service checks ProjectMember to verify that the user belongs to the same project.

Q6. Why must the assigned user belong to the project?
A. Otherwise a task from one project could be assigned to a user who has no access to that project. This is both a business and security requirement.

Q7. How does pagination work?
A. I accept page and limit query parameters. The database offset is calculated using (page - 1) * limit, and Prisma uses skip and take to retrieve only the required records.

Q8. Why use pagination?
A. It prevents the API from loading thousands of records into memory and sending a very large response to the client.

Q9. What is the maximum page size?
A. I limit the page size to 100 to prevent clients from requesting an unnecessarily large dataset.

Q10. How did you implement search?
A. I use Prisma's OR condition to search the task title and description using a case-insensitive contains filter.

Q11. How did you implement filtering?
A. Optional query parameters such as status, priority and assignedToId are converted into Prisma where conditions.

Q12. How did you implement sorting?
A. The API accepts a controlled sortBy value and sortOrder value, which are passed to Prisma's orderBy.

Q13. Why should sortBy be restricted to allowed values?
A. To prevent invalid queries and keep control over which database fields can be used for sorting.

Q14. Why use database indexes?
A. Indexes improve lookup and filtering performance. I added indexes on fields such as projectId, assignedToId, status, priority and dueDate.

Q15. Why is projectId indexed?
A. Most task queries are scoped to a project, so indexing projectId improves those queries.

Q16. How do you prevent a user from accessing a task from another project?
A. The task lookup uses both taskId and projectId. Therefore a valid task ID from another project will not be returned.

Q17. Why is checking only taskId unsafe?
A. If the API only checks taskId, a user could potentially provide a task ID belonging to another project. Scoping the query by projectId prevents cross-project resource access.

Q18. How does task authorization work?
A. First the JWT middleware authenticates the user. Then project permission middleware verifies their project membership and role. Finally, task-specific business rules are handled in the service layer.

Q19. Can every project member create tasks?
A. In the current design, OWNER, MANAGER and MEMBER can create tasks.

Q20. Can every project member delete tasks?
A. No. Only OWNER and MANAGER can delete tasks.

Q21. Can every project member assign tasks?
A. No. Assignment is restricted to OWNER and MANAGER in the current permission matrix.

Q22. Can a MEMBER complete a task?
A. Yes. Members can complete tasks because completing assigned work is part of their normal responsibility.

Q23. Why have a separate complete endpoint?
A. Completing a task is an important business operation with its own rules, so a dedicated endpoint makes the API clearer and allows the service to enforce completion-specific logic.

Q24. What happens if a task is already completed?
A. The service checks the current status and rejects another completion request instead of unnecessarily updating it.

Q25. Where do business rules belong?
A. Business rules belong primarily in the service layer. Controllers handle HTTP concerns, repositories handle database access, and services handle application logic.

Q26. Why use a repository layer?
A. It separates database access from business logic. This makes the service easier to test and allows database implementation details to remain inside the repository.

Q27. Why use Zod?
A. Zod validates incoming request data at runtime. TypeScript types disappear at runtime, so runtime validation is required for API input.

Q28. How do you validate dueDate?
A. I validate that it is an ISO datetime string and convert it to a JavaScript Date before storing it in PostgreSQL.

Q29. What happens if assignedToId doesn't belong to the project?
A. The service queries ProjectMember using projectId and assignedToId. If no membership exists, the operation is rejected.

Q30. Why use a transaction for task listing?
A. The list operation needs both the task records and the total count. Using a transaction keeps those related queries together and provides a consistent result.

Q31. What is the difference between skip and take in Prisma?
A. skip determines how many records to ignore, while take determines how many records to return.

Q32. How do you calculate pagination metadata?
A. totalPages is calculated using Math.ceil(total / limit).

Q33. How would you handle overdue tasks?
A. I would compare dueDate with the current time and expose an overdue filter or computed overdue property.

Q34. How would you implement "My Tasks"?
A. I would filter tasks using assignedToId equal to the authenticated user's ID.

Q35. How would you allow members to update only their assigned tasks?
A. The service would verify that the authenticated user's ID matches assignedToId before allowing the update.

Q36. How would you prevent a member from changing task priority?
A. I would implement field-level authorization in the service layer and allow members to change only permitted fields such as status.

Q37. What HTTP status do you return when a task doesn't exist?
A. Typically 404 Not Found.

Q38. What HTTP status do you return when the user doesn't have permission?
A. 403 Forbidden.

Q39. What HTTP status do you return when the JWT is missing or invalid?
A. 401 Unauthorized.

Q40. How would you improve the Task module for production?
A. I would add comprehensive unit and integration tests, centralized permission definitions, audit logging, optimistic concurrency handling, better database indexes, full-text search if required, task activity history, notifications and monitoring with Sentry.

MILESTONE 10 — Advanced REST API
1. What is pagination?

Answer:
Pagination means returning data in smaller chunks instead of returning all records at once. In TaskHub I implemented page and limit query parameters.

Example:

GET /api/v1/projects/:projectId/tasks?page=1&limit=10

This improves API performance and reduces the amount of data transferred.

2. Why is pagination important?

Answer:
If a project has thousands of tasks, returning everything in one response would be slow and consume more memory. Pagination allows the client to load only the required records.

3. What is filtering?

Answer:
Filtering allows the client to request only records matching specific conditions.

For example:

/tasks?status=TODO
/tasks?priority=HIGH
/tasks?assignedToId=USER_ID
4. What is searching?

Answer:
Searching allows users to find records based on text.

For example:

/tasks?search=authentication

The backend searches relevant task fields and returns matching tasks.

5. What is sorting?

Answer:
Sorting controls the order in which records are returned.

For example:

/tasks?sortBy=createdAt&sortOrder=desc
6. What is a query parameter?

Answer:
A query parameter is optional information sent after ? in a URL.

Example:

/tasks?page=1&limit=10&priority=HIGH

Here page, limit, and priority are query parameters.

7. What pagination metadata should an API return?

Answer:

{
  "page": 1,
  "limit": 10,
  "total": 45,
  "totalPages": 5,
  "hasNextPage": true,
  "hasPreviousPage": false
}

This allows the frontend to build pagination controls.

8. Why should API responses be consistent?

Answer:
Consistent responses make frontend development easier because the client knows what structure to expect from every endpoint.

For example:

{
  "success": true,
  "message": "Tasks fetched successfully",
  "data": {}
}
9. What is the difference between 400, 401, 403, 404 and 500?

Answer:

400 → Bad request / invalid input
401 → Not authenticated
403 → Authenticated but not authorized
404 → Resource not found
500 → Internal server error
10. What was the main goal of Milestone 10?

Answer:
To make the REST API production-quality by implementing pagination, filtering, searching, sorting, query parameters, metadata, and predictable API responses.

MILESTONE 11 — Validation + Security
11. Why do you validate requests?

Answer:
Request validation ensures that only valid and expected data reaches the business logic and database.

12. Why did you use Zod?

Answer:
Zod provides runtime validation and integrates well with TypeScript.

Example:

const schema = z.object({
  email: z.string().email(),
  password: z.string().min(8)
});
13. What happens when Zod validation fails?

Answer:
The request is rejected before the business logic executes, and the API returns a validation error instead of processing invalid data.

14. What is Helmet?

Answer:
Helmet is Express middleware that sets security-related HTTP headers to help protect the application from common web vulnerabilities.

15. What is CORS?

Answer:
CORS stands for Cross-Origin Resource Sharing. It controls which origins are allowed to access our backend from a browser.

16. Why use a CORS whitelist?

Answer:
Instead of allowing every website to call the API, we allow only trusted frontend origins.

Example:

http://localhost:3000
production-taskhub-domain
17. What is rate limiting?

Answer:
Rate limiting restricts how many requests a client can make within a specific period. It helps protect APIs from abuse, brute-force attacks, and excessive traffic.

18. How do you secure passwords?

Answer:
Passwords are hashed before storing them in the database. We never store plain-text passwords.

19. Why shouldn't the backend return passwords?

Answer:
Passwords are sensitive credentials and should never be included in API responses.

20. What is secure error handling?

Answer:
Secure error handling means returning useful information to the client without exposing internal stack traces, database details, secrets, or implementation information.

21. How do you validate uploaded files?

Answer:
I validate the file type and file size before accepting the upload.

For example, profile images can be restricted to:

JPEG
PNG
WEBP

and a maximum file size such as:

5 MB
MILESTONE 12 — Swagger / OpenAPI
22. What is Swagger?

Answer:
Swagger provides an interactive interface for exploring and testing REST APIs.

In TaskHub, developers can use /api-docs to inspect and test endpoints.

23. What is OpenAPI?

Answer:
OpenAPI is a standard specification for describing REST APIs, including endpoints, parameters, request bodies, responses, authentication, and schemas.

24. Why use Swagger?

Answer:
It makes the API easier to understand and test and provides documentation for frontend and other developers.

25. How did you document authentication?

Answer:
I configured bearer authentication so developers can enter a JWT token in Swagger and test protected endpoints.

26. What is Bearer authentication?

Answer:
Bearer authentication sends an access token using the HTTP Authorization header.

Authorization: Bearer <JWT>
27. What APIs should be documented?

Answer:
For TaskHub:

Auth
Users
Projects
Project Members
Tasks
Files
MILESTONE 13 — Next.js Web Foundation
28. Why use Next.js?

Answer:
Next.js provides routing, React-based UI development, server-side capabilities, TypeScript support, and a structured application architecture.

29. What is the App Router?

Answer:
The App Router is Next.js's file-system-based routing architecture using the app directory.

For example:

src/app/login/page.tsx
src/app/projects/page.tsx
src/app/projects/[projectId]/page.tsx
30. What is a dynamic route?

Answer:
A dynamic route contains a variable segment.

Example:

/projects/[projectId]

It can represent:

/projects/123
/projects/456
31. What is a reusable component?

Answer:
A reusable component is a UI component that can be used in multiple places.

For example:

AppButton
AppDialog
AppSnackbar
LoadingState
EmptyState
32. Why use TypeScript in the frontend?

Answer:
TypeScript provides static type checking, better autocomplete, safer refactoring, and helps prevent many runtime errors.

MILESTONE 14 — Tailwind + Material UI
33. Why use Tailwind CSS?

Answer:
Tailwind allows us to build responsive layouts quickly using utility classes directly in the components.

34. Why use Material UI?

Answer:
MUI provides ready-made professional components such as buttons, dialogs, forms, tables, pagination, snackbars, and other UI elements.

35. Tailwind vs MUI?

Answer:

Tailwind:

Layout
Spacing
Responsive styling
Custom design

MUI:

Prebuilt components
Dialogs
Forms
Tables
Snackbar
Pagination

I can use both together depending on the requirement.

36. What is responsive design?

Answer:
Responsive design means the UI adapts to different screen sizes such as desktop, tablet, and mobile.

37. What loading states did you implement?

Answer:
I created reusable loading components so API-driven pages can display a consistent loading state while data is being fetched.

38. What is an empty state?

Answer:
An empty state is displayed when there is no data.

Example:

No projects found.
Create your first project.
39. What is Snackbar?

Answer:
Snackbar provides short-lived feedback to the user, such as:

Project created successfully.
Task deleted successfully.
Login failed.
40. Why are reusable UI components important?

Answer:
They reduce duplicated code and ensure consistent UI and behavior throughout the application.

MILESTONE 15 — Redux Toolkit + RTK Query
41. What is Redux?

Answer:
Redux is a state management library used to maintain predictable application state.

42. Why Redux Toolkit?

Answer:
Redux Toolkit is the recommended way to write Redux because it reduces boilerplate and provides utilities for slices, reducers, actions, and store configuration.

43. What is a Redux store?

Answer:
The Redux store contains the application's centralized client state.

44. What is a slice?

Answer:
A slice contains state, reducers, and actions for a specific feature.

For example:

authSlice
projectSlice
uiSlice
45. What is a reducer?

Answer:
A reducer describes how state changes in response to an action.

46. What is an action?

Answer:
An action describes an event or state change.

For example:

setCredentials(...)
logout()
47. What is RTK Query?

Answer:
RTK Query is Redux Toolkit's data-fetching and caching solution for server state.

48. Redux vs RTK Query?

Answer:

I use Redux slices for client-side state:

Authentication
UI state
Local application state

I use RTK Query for server-side state:

Users
Projects
Tasks
Members
49. What is cache invalidation?

Answer:
Cache invalidation tells RTK Query that previously fetched data is no longer guaranteed to be current, so it should refetch the data.

Example:

Create Task
   ↓
Invalidate Tasks
   ↓
Refetch Tasks
   ↓
Updated UI
50. What is a mutation?

Answer:
A mutation changes server data.

Examples:

POST
PATCH
DELETE
51. What is a query?

Answer:
A query retrieves server data.

Examples:

GET /projects
GET /tasks
GET /users/me
52. Why is RTK Query useful?

Answer:
It handles:

API requests
Loading states
Error states
Caching
Refetching
Cache invalidation

which reduces the amount of manual API state management.

MILESTONE 16 — Web + API Integration
53. How does the web application connect to the backend?

Answer:

Next.js
 ↓
RTK Query
 ↓
REST API
 ↓
Express
 ↓
Service
 ↓
Repository
 ↓
PostgreSQL
54. Explain the login flow.

Answer:

User enters email/password
        ↓
Login mutation
        ↓
POST /auth/login
        ↓
Backend validates credentials
        ↓
JWT generated
        ↓
Response returned
        ↓
Redux auth state updated
        ↓
Navigate to dashboard
55. How does signup work?

Answer:
The frontend sends user registration data to the Express registration endpoint. The backend validates it, hashes the password, creates the user, generates authentication tokens, and returns the user data.

56. How does logout work?

Answer:
The frontend clears the authentication state and removes the user's authentication information from the application.

57. How do you handle API loading states?

Answer:
RTK Query provides loading and fetching states, which are used by the UI to show loading indicators and prevent duplicate submissions.

58. How do you handle API errors?

Answer:
RTK Query exposes API errors to the UI, where I display user-friendly error messages using components such as Snackbar or inline error states.

59. What CRUD operations are implemented?

Answer:

Projects → Create, Read, Update, Delete
Tasks → Create, Read, Update, Delete
Members → Add, Read, Update role, Remove
Profile → Read, Update
Authentication → Signup, Login, Logout
60. What does "same REST backend" mean?

Answer:
Both the web application and mobile application communicate with the same Express REST API instead of having separate backend implementations.

MILESTONE 17 — React Native Foundation
61. Why React Native?

Answer:
React Native allows us to build mobile applications using React and JavaScript/TypeScript while sharing development concepts and API architecture with the web application.

62. Why Expo?

Answer:
Expo provides tooling and libraries that simplify React Native development, builds, navigation, device functionality, and development workflows.

63. What is Expo Router?

Answer:
Expo Router provides file-based navigation for React Native applications.

64. What mobile screens did you create?

Answer:

Splash
Login
Signup
Home
Projects
Project Details
Tasks
Task Details
Profile
65. Why use reusable mobile components?

Answer:
Reusable components keep the mobile UI consistent and reduce duplicated code.

MILESTONE 18 — React Native + Redux + REST
66. How does mobile communicate with the backend?

Answer:

React Native
 ↓
API layer / RTK Query
 ↓
Express REST API
 ↓
Services
 ↓
Repositories
 ↓
PostgreSQL
67. Does mobile use a different backend?

Answer:
No. The mobile application uses the same TaskHub REST backend used by the web application.

68. How does mobile authentication work?

Answer:
The user logs in through the REST API. The backend returns authentication tokens, and the mobile application stores the authentication state and uses the token for protected API requests.

69. What happens when the token expires?

Answer:
The application should use the refresh-token flow to obtain a new access token. If refreshing fails, the user should be logged out and redirected to login.

70. Why is authentication persistence important on mobile?

Answer:
Without persistence, users would have to log in every time the application restarts. Persistence allows the application to restore the authenticated session.

71. What mobile states should be handled?

Answer:

Loading
Success
Empty
Error
Authenticated
Unauthenticated
Refreshing
MILESTONE 19 — AWS S3
72. Why use Amazon S3?

Answer:
S3 provides scalable cloud object storage for files such as profile images.

73. What is a presigned URL?

Answer:
A presigned URL is a temporary URL that provides limited access to an S3 object without exposing AWS credentials.

74. Why use presigned URLs?

Answer:
They allow clients to upload or download files directly from S3 without sending the actual file through the backend.

75. Explain the S3 upload flow.

Answer:

Mobile/Web
   ↓
POST /files/upload-url
   ↓
Backend validates file
   ↓
Generate presigned S3 URL
   ↓
Client uploads directly to S3
   ↓
S3 stores file
   ↓
Backend stores/reference file key
76. What is the advantage of direct S3 upload?

Answer:
It reduces backend bandwidth and processing because the backend doesn't need to receive and stream the entire file.

77. How do you secure S3 files?

Answer:
The bucket should not be publicly writable. Access is controlled through IAM and temporary presigned URLs.

78. How do you validate uploaded files?

Answer:
I validate:

File type
File size
File name/key rules

before generating the upload URL.

79. How does profile avatar integration work?

Answer:

Upload image
 ↓
S3
 ↓
Generate signed download URL
 ↓
Save avatarUrl
 ↓
GET /users/me
 ↓
Frontend displays avatar
80. Why shouldn't AWS credentials be sent to the frontend?

Answer:
AWS credentials provide direct access to AWS resources and must remain private. The backend generates temporary presigned URLs instead.

MILESTONE 20 — AWS SES
81. What is Amazon SES?

Answer:
Amazon SES is an AWS service for sending transactional and application emails.

82. What is a transactional email?

Answer:
A transactional email is triggered by an application event.

Examples:

Welcome email
Password reset
Project invitation
Task assignment
Task completion
83. Explain the email architecture.

Answer:

Application event
      ↓
Email Service
      ↓
AWS SES
      ↓
Recipient
84. Why create a separate EmailService?

Answer:
It separates email infrastructure from business logic. Controllers and services can request an email without knowing how SES works internally.

85. What happens when a user registers?

Answer:

Register
 ↓
Create user
 ↓
Generate tokens
 ↓
Trigger welcome email
 ↓
EmailService
 ↓
AWS SES
86. What email events did you implement?

Answer:

Welcome
Password reset
Project invitation
Task assignment
Task completion
87. What is the difference between HTML and text email?

Answer:
HTML provides rich formatting, while text provides a plain-text alternative for clients that don't support or prefer HTML emails.

88. What happens if SES fails?

Answer:
The application should handle the email failure safely and log the error without unnecessarily causing the main business operation to fail, depending on the business requirement.

For example, user registration shouldn't necessarily fail just because a welcome email temporarily failed.

89. What is SES sandbox mode?

Answer:
In SES sandbox mode, sending is restricted and recipient identities generally need to be verified. Production access can be requested from AWS.

90. Why is email verification important?

Answer:
AWS needs to verify that the sender identity is authorized to send emails through SES. Without verification, SES can reject the request.

MILESTONE 21 — AWS CloudWatch
91. What is Amazon CloudWatch?

Answer:
CloudWatch is AWS's monitoring and observability service for logs, metrics, alarms, and operational information.

92. Why use CloudWatch in TaskHub?

Answer:
It allows us to centrally monitor backend activity instead of relying only on local terminal logs.

93. What are application logs?

Answer:
Application logs record important events happening inside the backend.

Examples:

User registered
Login successful
Database error
API request
S3 operation
Email failure
94. What are API request logs?

Answer:
They record information about HTTP requests such as:

HTTP method
Route
Status code
Latency
User ID
IP
95. How did you measure API latency?

Answer:
The middleware records the start time when the request enters the application and calculates the difference when the response finishes.

Conceptually:

latency = responseTime - requestStartTime
96. What is a CloudWatch metric?

Answer:
A metric is a numerical measurement that can be monitored over time.

For TaskHub:

ApiRequests
ApiLatency
ApiErrors
ProcessHeapUsed
ProcessRSS
ProcessUptime
SystemMemoryUsage
97. What is a CloudWatch Log Group?

Answer:
A log group is a container used to organize related log streams.

Our example:

/taskhub/backend
98. What is a Log Stream?

Answer:
A log stream is a sequence of log events within a CloudWatch log group.

For example:

/taskhub/backend
    └── backend
99. What is a custom CloudWatch namespace?

Answer:
A namespace is a logical grouping for metrics.

For TaskHub:

TaskHub/Backend
100. What is ApiRequests?

Answer:
It measures the number of API requests processed by the backend.

101. What is ApiErrors?

Answer:
It tracks requests that result in error HTTP status codes, such as 4xx and 5xx responses.

102. What is ApiLatency?

Answer:
It measures how long the backend takes to process an API request.

103. What is process memory monitoring?

Answer:
It allows us to monitor Node.js resource usage such as:

Heap used
Heap total
RSS
System memory
104. What is process uptime?

Answer:
It represents how long the Node.js backend process has been running.

105. Why should monitoring not slow down the API?

Answer:
Monitoring should be non-blocking whenever possible. The application shouldn't wait for CloudWatch to finish before responding to the user.

IMPORTANT CROSS-MILESTONE QUESTIONS

These are especially useful for a 5–7 year full-stack / React Native interview.

106. Explain the complete TaskHub architecture.

Answer:

                 ┌──────────────┐
                 │   Next.js    │
                 │     Web      │
                 └──────┬───────┘
                        │
                 ┌──────▼───────┐
                 │ React Native │
                 │    Mobile    │
                 └──────┬───────┘
                        │
                        ▼
                ┌───────────────┐
                │ Express REST  │
                │      API      │
                └───────┬───────┘
                        │
             ┌──────────┼──────────┐
             ▼          ▼          ▼
          Routes    Services   Middleware
                        │
                        ▼
                   Repository
                        │
                        ▼
                   PostgreSQL

AWS:
 ├── S3  → File storage
 ├── SES → Transactional email
 └── CloudWatch → Logs & metrics
107. Explain a request from frontend to database.

Answer:

Frontend
 ↓
HTTP request
 ↓
Express route
 ↓
Authentication middleware
 ↓
Authorization middleware
 ↓
Controller
 ↓
Validation
 ↓
Service
 ↓
Repository
 ↓
Prisma
 ↓
PostgreSQL
 ↓
Response
 ↓
RTK Query
 ↓
UI
108. Why separate Controller, Service and Repository?

Answer:
It follows separation of concerns.

Controller → HTTP responsibility
Service    → Business logic
Repository → Database logic

This makes the application easier to maintain, test and scale.

109. How do you protect a TaskHub API?

Answer:

JWT authentication
Zod validation
Authorization
Helmet
CORS
Rate limiting
Secure error handling
File validation
IAM
Presigned S3 URLs
110. How does a protected API request work?

Answer:

Authorization: Bearer JWT

Then:

Request
 ↓
Auth middleware
 ↓
Verify JWT
 ↓
Get userId/role
 ↓
Authorization check
 ↓
Controller
111. What happens if a user tries to access another project's tasks?

Answer:
The backend checks project membership and permissions. If the user isn't authorized, the request is rejected with an appropriate authorization response such as 403 Forbidden.

112. How do web and mobile share backend functionality?

Answer:
Both applications consume the same REST API.

Next.js ───────┐
               ├──→ Express REST API
React Native ──┘

This avoids duplicating business logic.

113. How would you improve TaskHub for production?

Answer:
I would consider:

Redis caching
Background job queues
Email retry mechanism
CloudWatch alarms
Database indexing
Automated backups
CI/CD
Docker
Load balancing
Horizontal scaling
Sentry/error tracking
Automated tests
API versioning
Refresh-token rotation
114. What would you monitor in production?

Answer:

API request count
API latency
4xx errors
5xx errors
CPU usage
Memory usage
Database performance
S3 errors
SES failures
Authentication failures
Application uptime
115. How would you debug a slow API?

Answer:

Check CloudWatch latency
 ↓
Identify slow endpoint
 ↓
Check service logic
 ↓
Check database query
 ↓
Check indexes
 ↓
Check external services
 ↓
Optimize
 ↓
Measure again
116. How would you debug a production 500 error?

Answer:

I would first check CloudWatch logs to identify the endpoint and error. Then I'd inspect the stack trace and relevant service/repository logic, reproduce the issue if possible, fix it, test it, and deploy the fix.

117. How would you handle a large number of tasks?

Answer:
I would use database-level pagination rather than loading all tasks into memory. I'd also add appropriate database indexes for commonly filtered and sorted fields.

118. How would you improve API performance?

Answer:

Pagination
Database indexes
Efficient Prisma queries
Selective fields
Caching
Compression
Connection pooling
Avoid N+1 queries
Monitoring
119. Why shouldn't the frontend be responsible for security?

Answer:
Frontend code can be modified or bypassed by users. The backend must independently authenticate and authorize every protected operation.

120. What is the biggest architectural benefit of your TaskHub project?

Answer:
The main benefit is separation of concerns with a shared REST backend. Web and mobile clients can evolve independently while using the same authentication, business logic, database, S3 storage, SES email system, and monitoring infrastructure.

Milestone 21 — AWS CloudWatch

Q: Why did you use CloudWatch?
A: CloudWatch provides centralized application logs, metrics, monitoring, and operational visibility for the TaskHub backend.

Q: What logs does TaskHub send to CloudWatch?
A: API request logs and application error logs.

Q: What metrics does TaskHub publish?
A: Request count, error count, request latency, Node.js heap memory, RSS memory, and process uptime.

Q: How are custom metrics sent to CloudWatch?
A: Using AWS SDK v3's PutMetricData API.

Q: How are application logs sent?
A: Using CloudWatch Logs APIs such as CreateLogGroup, CreateLogStream, and PutLogEvents.

Q: Why measure API latency?
A: To identify slow endpoints and monitor backend performance.

Q: Why monitor memory?
A: Increasing heap/RSS usage can indicate memory pressure or memory leaks.

Q: What is a CloudWatch namespace?
A: A logical container used to organize metrics. TaskHub uses TaskHub/Backend.

Q: What is a CloudWatch log group?
A: A container that organizes related log streams. TaskHub uses /taskhub/backend.

Q: What is a log stream?
A: A sequence of log events from an application instance or source.

Q: Why should CloudWatch failures not break API requests?
A: Observability is secondary. A monitoring failure should never make the business API unavailable.

Q: Why should sensitive data not be logged?
A: Logs can contain sensitive information and are stored centrally. Passwords, tokens, authorization headers, and secrets should never be logged.

Q: What AWS permissions are required?
A: CloudWatch Logs permissions for creating groups/streams and writing events, plus cloudwatch:PutMetricData for custom metrics.

Q: What is centralized monitoring?
A: Collecting application activity and performance information in one monitoring system instead of checking individual server logs.

Q: How would you improve this in production?
A: Use structured logging, batching, correlation/request IDs, alarms, dashboards, retention policies, and platform-native log shipping where appropriate.

Milestone 22